---
abstract: |
    High rates of congressional turnover during the new republic's first
    decades produced a kind of de facto rotation in office, bringing new
    members with fresh ideas, but also erasing the knowledge and expertise
    of experienced members. While some incumbent members did not return to
    Congress at the wishes of their constituents, others chose to leave
    their seat voluntarily in order to remain at home with their families,
    or seek other political or economic opportunities.
summary: "Early congresses featured high turnover rates due to the republic’s political culture and personal hardships."    
always_allow_html: yes
author: "Jordan F. Bratt"
doi: https://doi.org/10.31835/meae.essays.05
image: "/content-img/unopposed-incumbent-elections.jpg"
layout: essay
order: 5
output:
  html_document:
    theme: default
  md_document:
    preserve_yaml: True
    variant: markdown
  pdf_document: default
title: "Congressional Incumbency in the Early Republic"
year: 2019
---

The issue of congressional turnover provides important insights into the
nature of political representation in Congress. Turnover measures the
number of representatives who fail to return to the next session of
Congress, either through a failure to be reelected or voluntary
retirement from office. Turnover has changed dramatically over time. In
recent Congresses, no more than ten percent of the membership has left,
or been replaced, during a typical election cycle. In one recent
Congress---the 115th, elected in 2016---only three percent of the
sitting members of Congress failed to be reelected. (In other words, 380
of the 393 members who sought reelection were successful.) In the early
Congresses, however, thirty percent or more of the membership typically
failed to return to their seat in the next Congress.

Another way to think about turnover is through the concept of
incumbency. Incumbency measures the percentage of members who remain in
office rather than the proportion of those who rotate out of office.
Incumbency can take two different forms: *party* incumbency and
*legislator* incumbency. The primary difference is between what is
measured. Whereas "legislator" incumbency focuses on whether or not a
*particular individual* remains in office, "party" incumbency focuses on
which *political party* remains in office, even if specific
representatives themselves are different. This approach has the
advantage of highlighting the persistence of particular parties in
various geographic regions. The Mapping Early American Elections (MEAE)
project provides a nuanced lens through which to explore reelection and
incumbency during the nation's formative years.

In the early republic, the political scene was quite different from that
of today. State legislators elected the Senate. Either state legislators
or the voters in a state elected the presidential electors who, in turn,
elected the president. The House of Representatives was the only part of
the federal government in which officials were directly elected by the
people. The first Congress in 1789 met in New York City; the Second
Congress, in Philadelphia. Then, in the 1801, the federal government
moved from Philadelphia to the newly built capital in Washington D.C.
The new federal city did not offer the comfortable services, amenities,
and cultural life that Philadelphia and New York City had provided. Even
more important, Congress met at a far distance from where most Americans
lived. Representatives had to spend long periods of time away from their
families and homes while Congress was in session. This isolation put a
strain on marriages, family relationships, and personal finances,
contributing to a high rate of voluntary retirements. In fact, about
one-third of those who did not return to the next Congress had done so
not because they had failed to be reelected, but because they chose to
leave their seat voluntarily. Serving in Congress thus often imposed
extreme burdens on the members of Congress as well as their families.

  Candidate           ID       1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19
  ------------------- -------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  Caesar A. Rodney    RC0001   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   NA     NA
  Henry M. Ridgely    RH0001   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  James A. Bayard     BJ0078   NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   TRUE   TRUE   NA     TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  James M. Broom      BJ0090   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  John Patten         PJ0032   NA     NA     TRUE   TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  John Vining         VJ0002   TRUE   TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  Louis McLane        ML0002   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   TRUE   TRUE   TRUE   TRUE
  Nicholas Van Dyke   VN0010   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  Thomas Clayton      CT0005   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  Thomas Cooper       CT0008   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   TRUE   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
  Willard Hall        HW0048   NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     TRUE   TRUE   NA     NA     NA

The framers of the Constitution did not include a provision establishing
a mandatory rotation in office for members of Congress. What may appear
to be a critical oversight was more accurately a point of debate. James
Madison, George Mason, and Thomas Jefferson supported such a provision
and many state constitutions included mandatory rotation of office for
their governors and legislatures. However, those who opposed the
provision thought that the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation
highlighted the need for a stronger federal government, one in which
those elected did so on their merit and reputation. In the end, instead
of dictating how many terms members of Congress could serve, they left
it to the voters to decide who should be elected or reelected. The
framers did not, however, anticipate the emergence of political parties.

The emergence of political parties meant that voters could elect members
to Congress from the same political party (who presumably shared similar
basic party ideology), while electing different individuals to serve in
that position. The MEAE project enables us to visually track party
incumbency, or party persistence, over time. For example, beginning in
the 3rd Congress, Maryland's 1st, 3rd, and 8th districts (representing
the southern and western part of the state) continued to reelect
Federalists until the 18th Congress. During this time span, although
sixteen different candidates were elected, all were members of the
Federalist party in some form. Similarly, Maryland's 5th district,
encompassing the city of Baltimore and the surrounding area, remained
solidly Democratic-Republican. Maryland's remaining districts oscillated
between Federalist and Democratic-Republican. This persistence of these
patterns of incumbency highlight the regional differences within the
state as well as demonstrate the differences between an urban center and
more rural counties.

While career or professional politicians did not exist in the early
years of the country, there were a number of individuals who maintained
a sustained tenure in Congress. Thomas Newton Jr. of Virginia served as
a Representative from the 7th--22nd Congresses. (Note, however, that
MEAE has election data only for the 7th--19th Congresses.) Representing
the area surrounding Norfolk, Newton remained a popular candidate,
winning the majority of his elections in landslides. Even more
surprising is Newton's support of John Quincy Adams in the hotly
contested 1824 Presidential election. Newton represented one of only
seven Adams-Clay supporters in his entire state. Another Virginia
representative who had a long career was John Randolph who served in
twelve Congresses from 1800 to 1827. Randolph is of particular interest
because his party allegiance changes over the course of his political
life. Initially a Democratic-Republican, Randolph split from the party
and joined coalition of politicians known as Tertium Quids for
Congresses 9--12. Twice he ran unopposed, even after becoming a Tertium
Quid. Newton and Randolph represent a group of Virginia incumbents who
continued to be reelected and maintained their voice and influence
within Congress over long periods of time.

![While most early Congressmen did not sustain a long tenure in
Congress, Thomas Newton Jr. of Virginia---elected to sixteen consecutive
Congresses from 1801--1833---was an exception. This chart shows the
percentage of the vote received by Newton and his opponents from the
Sixth through Nineteenth Congresses (elections for which MEAE has data).
Newton's extended stint of successful elections (shown in purple) not
only demonstrates legislator incumbency---Newton as an individual
continued to be re-elected---but also party incumbency---the
Democratic-Republican party, of which Newton was a part, had sustained
victories over several different candidates all of whom represented the
Federalist Party. Note: Newton was elected to the
<a href="http://earlyamericanelections.org/maps/meae.congressional.congress12.va.county.html">Twelfth
</a> and
<a href="http://earlyamericanelections.org/maps/meae.congressional.congress18.va.county.html">Eighteenth
</a> Congresses. However, complete data giving exact vote counts for
these elections does not survive. Therefore, victories in theses
elections are shown with a shaded purple
box.](/content-img/newton-incumbency.png)

Unopposed reelections represent an intriguing subsection of incumbency
in the early republic. Of all the congressional elections in the MEAE
dataset, 322 or twelve percent are unopposed elections. 250 of those
elections represent unopposed incumbents. William A. Burwell of Virginia
participated in the most unopposed elections, winning a seat in the 10th
through the 16th Congresses. Burwell was hardly the exception for
Virginia. Nine of the top fifteen representatives with the most
unopposed elections were from the state of Virginia accounting for
fifty-nine percent of the total 75 elections among them. Virginia
accounted for the most unopposed elections and the majority of unopposed
elections took place in the South (Virginia, Kentucky, South Carolina,
and North Carolina). The prevalence of unopposed incumbents in Virginia
illustrates both the district-wide support for the individual, as well
as the political clout such a person wielded. These elections also
reflect the persistence of an older form of deferential politics that
was quickly becoming obsolete in a democratizing nation.

![In a little over nine percent of all US congressional elections held
from 1789--1825, incumbent candidates (current office holders) faced no
political rivals and were re-elected without opposition. This map breaks
down these elections by state, showing the percentage of elections held
in each state that were won by unopposed incumbents. As the map shows,
the largest percentage of unopposed incumbent elections were won in
southern states such as Kentucky, South Carolina, North Carolina, and
Virginia---the later having the highest percentage, with 45.2% of its
elections won by unopposed incumbents. This suggests that despite the
new language of "democratic" politics, an older style of deferential
politics was still the accepted practice in the South for at least the
first thirty years of US Congressional
elections.](/content-img/unopposed-incumbent-elections.png)

Both in the early republic and today, high turnover can result from a
number of causes. Voters may turn their representatives out of office at
a high rate because of dissatisfaction with their member's views or
character, or from a desire to have a fresh face in Congress.
Alternatively, high turnover may result from representatives themselves
refusing to seek reelection, either because they fear losing their seat,
desire to remain at home with their families, or choose to seek other
political or economic opportunities. Turnover can be a healthy
development, by bringing new members to Congress who revitalize the
institution. Turnover can also be disadvantageous because it removes
experienced members from Congress, thus depriving the institution of
their knowledge and expertise. Despite the lack of formal restriction on
congressional terms, high turnover in the early congresses produced a
kind of de facto rotation in office during the new republic's first
decades. At the same time, incumbency rates tell a slightly different
story. During the first decades of the new nation, incumbency rates
reveal how and when different regions of the country, and different
areas within the states, chose to support one party or the other. The
maps in the MEAE project reveal the shifting fates of the Federalists
and Democratic-Republicans as well as emergence at different times of
splinter factions and new political parties. These maps then, illustrate
the story of the country's complex and uneven path toward a two-party
political system.
