---
abstract: |
    Throughout the first years of the new nation's existence, geographic
    considerations and local issues often played a significant role in
    determining party allegiances and political preferences. During
    Maryland's second congressional election, political leaders discarded
    their national party affiliations and instead embraced local party
    labels to represent their stance on a local matter. While the
    "Chesapeake" and "Potomac" parties only appeared in one election, the
    two regionally-based voting blocs they represented continued to
    influence voting patterns throughout the state for almost two decades.
summary: "Maryland’s geography created a unique political culture informed by an extreme aura of localism."
always_allow_html: yes
author: Greta Swain
doi: https://doi.org/10.31835/meae.essays.06
image: "/content-img/maryland-map-1795.jpg"
attribution: "Maryland (1795) by Joseph Scott, printed by Francis & Robert Bailey, Philadelphia, PA ([Library of Congress](https://www.loc.gov/item/76695375/)). Philadelphia engraver Joseph Scott’s 1795 “Gazetteer of the United States” contains some of the earliest American-made maps of the United States, and is particularly known for its maps of each individual state. Scott’s map of Maryland quite accurately presents Maryland’s topography and geography—dominated by its abundant waterways—which played a crucial role in shaping the state’s early political development."
layout: essay
order: 6
output:
  html_document:
    theme: default
  md_document:
    preserve_yaml: True
    variant: markdown
  pdf_document: default
title: "Maryland's Geography of Politics in the Early Republic"
year: 2019
---

The Mapping Early American Elections (MEAE) project presents
visualizations of the election returns contained in the New Nation Votes
(NNV) database. These visualizations, presented in the form of maps,
afford researchers an ideal opportunity to examine the role of geography
in shaping the outcome of the state's early political contests. Unlike
many other states, whose election returns are scattered or incomplete,
Maryland has an almost complete set of election data for the period from
1789 to 1824. At the same time, Maryland's topography and physical
features---especially its two major waterways---created a situation in
which geography played a determinative role in shaping the state's
political development. While the political history of the early American
republic has traditionally been told as a contest between two emerging
parties---first, between the Federalist and Anti-Federalists, and later,
between the Federalists and Democratic-Republicans---Maryland offers a
bracing counter-example which complicates this conventional narrative.

At the time of the ratification of the US Constitution, state-level
politics in Maryland had already split into two distinct voting blocs.
There was a creditor bloc that primarily represented wealthy landowners
and planters, who favored higher taxes. These taxes, collected in hard
money, were to be used to pay off Maryland's war debts. Such taxes,
however, imposed severe hardships on small farmers, who were suffering
from a post-war economic depression and lacked access to hard money.
These individuals, who often identified with the debtor bloc, opposed
high taxes and wished to pay their taxes in the form of commodities,
such as farm produce, rather than in hard cash. While creditors
generally supported a strong national government, debtors generally
opposed it.

During Maryland's first congressional election in 1789, these voting
blocs coalesced into more formal political alliances. While many from
the creditor bloc became affiliated with the Federalists, many from the
debtor bloc identified with the Anti-Federalists. In Maryland's first
congressional election, the Federalists made a clean sweep of the
offices, with all six of their candidates being elected by a large
margin. The Anti-Federalists received a majority of the vote in only two
counties, Baltimore and next-door Anne Arundel. With their initial
victory, the Federalists seemed poised to dominate Maryland elections
for years to come. However, before the second congressional election, an
important decision in Congress---the Compromise of 1790---sparked a
re-configuration of the voting blocs along geographic lines. This new
alignment would shape the state's politics for the next thirty years.

In the First Congress, two major issues generated intense controversy:
the assumption of state war debts from the American Revolution and the
location of a new national capital. Numerous locations for the new
capital were proposed, including New York City; Germantown, Lancaster,
York and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as well as Trenton and Princeton,
New Jersey. Many of these cities had previously hosted the federal
government during the American Revolution. Of special interest to
residents of Maryland was the proposal of two locations on the upper
Chesapeake: Baltimore (which briefly hosted a fleeing Continental
Congress in 1776) and Annapolis (home to the Confederation Congress for
two months in 1783). Nevertheless, it was well-known that President
George Washington preferred that the new capital be located on the
Potomac River, at a site close to his home at Mount Vernon, Virginia. As
it happened, this site also was quite near the demographic center of the
country at the time. The Compromise of 1790 resolved both issues at the
same time. In the famous "dinner table" bargain, northern states agreed
to the the assumption of state debts by the federal government and in
return, southern states received a southern location for the new
capital.

Reactions in Maryland to Congress's decision were split along geographic
lines. Marylanders living around the Chesapeake Bay were furious with
the federal government and with their own representatives who had voted
in favor of the Potomac location. Residents of Baltimore and Annapolis
believed they had lost a great opportunity for economic growth and
prosperity. At the same time, Marylanders who lived near the Potomac
River applauded the decision. In addition to placing the county's
permanent capital in their area, Congress had also set up the Potomac
Company, a firm that planned to build a canal to transport goods from
western regions to east coast port cities. As a result, these areas
tended to trust and support the federal government.

This split produced a long-term regional rivalry between the counties in
different parts of the state. In the second election for Congress,
Maryland political leaders discarded their national party affiliations
and embraced new party labels---"Chesapeake" Party and "Potomac"
Party---to indicate the importance of local issues, even in an election
to national office.

When Marylanders voted in the second congressional election on October
4, 1790, not only did they vote for parties unique to Maryland, but they
also engaged in an one-of-a-kind voting procedure. All of the other
states at the time (except Delaware) used one of two types of voting
methods: the at-large system, in which candidates who resided anywhere
in state and received the most votes overall were elected to office, or
the district system, in which a state was divided into districts and
each district's voters elected one (or more) persons to represent their
area. Maryland's six representatives were elected using a distinctive
variant of the at-large method. While the six candidates with the most
votes were elected, voters had to select one candidate who resided in
each of state's six districts.

Conveniently, both the Chesapeake and Potomac parties produced a slate
of six candidates, one from each district. The Chesapeake's ticket
included Philip Key (District 1), incumbent Joshua Seney (District 2),
William Pinkney (District 3), William Murray (District 5), and Upton
Sheredine (District 6). The Potomac Party ticket included James Tilghman
(District 2), and incumbents Michael Stone (District 1), Benjamin Contee
(District 3), George Gale (District 5), and Daniel Carroll (District 6).
Interestingly, both parties named Samuel Sterett from Baltimore as their
candidate for District 4. The Potomac Party, it seems, could not find
anyone willing to challenge a Chesapeake candidate in the Baltimore
area. As a result, Sterett received almost 6,000 more votes than any
other candidate.

As a testament to the importance of the issue, Marylanders, especially
in the Chesapeake counties, came out to vote in extremely high numbers.
Baltimore city itself experienced an astoundingly high voter turnout
rate of 99%. Chesapeake voters made their outrage at the Compromise of
1790 known. Consequently, the Chesapeake Party swept the field, emerging
victorious in all six of the districts. The five incumbent Potomac
candidates, who had generally supported the Potomac location for the
capital, were defeated, and the makeup of Maryland's congressional
delegation was significantly altered. The results of this election were
so staggering that the state legislature, dominated by Federalists,
promptly altered the state's voting procedures for the next
congressional election and switched to a traditional district system.

As the map for Maryland's Second Congressional election (figure 1)
shows, the Chesapeake Party's victory was fueled largely by support in
the Upper Bay and Eastern Shore areas (highlighted in red). Voters in
Baltimore city and Baltimore County choose Chesapeake candidates almost
exclusively (33,189 to 12 votes), and joined with other Upper Bay voters
in Harford, Cecil and Kent counties to form a powerful alliance with a
large number of voters. In addition, the Chesapeake Party received
staunch support from the Eastern Shore, receiving 93.8% of the vote in
Queen Anne County, 99.3% in Dorchester, and 67.6% in Caroline. In
contrast, support for the Potomac party (highlighted in blue) followed
along the Potomac River and included Allegheny, Washington, Frederick,
Montgomery, Prince George's, Charles, and St. Mary's counties.
Interestingly, the Potomac party also received support from some
counties not directly on the river, such as Calvert, Talbot, Somerset
and Worcester counties. Finally, in areas located between the Potomac
and Chesapeake regions, votes were almost evenly split. For example, in
Ann Arundel County, the results were 48.3% for the Chesapeake party to
51.7% for the Potomac party. In Annapolis, 49.1% of the voters supported
the Chesapeake party while 50.9% voted for the Potomac party.

![Maryland's election for the
<a href="http://earlyamericanelections.org/maps/meae.congressional.congress02.md.county.html">Second
Congress</a> demonstrates how topography and physical features played a
determinative role in shaping the state's political development. After
mixed reactions to Congress's decision to place the nation's capital on
the Potomac River at Washington, D.C., Maryland's congressional
candidates deviated from national affiliations to address a local issue.
Instead, they formed two geographically-based parties: the Chesapeake
Party (red) and the Potomac Party (blue). As the map shows, counties
along the Potomac River expressed their approval of Congress's decision
by voting for Potomac candidates, while counties at the top of
Chesapeake Bay and along the Eastern Shore made their outrage at the
Compromise of 1790 known by voting for Chesapeake candidates. Counties
located between the two waterways generally split their votes among both
parties.](/content-img/md2-map.png)

Despite the formation of these two cohesive, regionally-based voting
blocs, the Potomac and Chesapeake parties appear as clearly identified
parties only in this single election. Two years later, candidates
running for the the third Congress identified themselves as
"Federalists" and "Anti-Federalists," signaling a return to national
party affiliations. However, while the "Potomac" and "Chesapeake" party
labels disappeared, the general regional alignment established during
the second congressional election remained. Although the regional voting
blocs were never as tight-knit as they had been in the 1790 election,
they continued to influence voting patterns throughout the state for
almost two decades.

The continuation of these regional divisions can be seen in the maps and
charts depicting Maryland's third through seventeenth Congressional
elections (figures 2 and 3). From 1792-1820, distinct voting patterns
emerged in three geographical areas: consistent support for the
Democratic-Republicans in the Upper Chesapeake (Districts 5, 6 and 7),
in places which had supported the Chesapeake party; consistent support
for the Federalists in southern Maryland (Districts 1 and 8), from areas
that had supported the Potomac party; and consistently mixed voting
patterns in Maryland's western and middle areas (Districts 2, 3 and 4).

![The regional divisions established during Maryland's Second
congressional election formed the basis for voting patterns from
1792-1820. Generally, the counties in the Upper Chesapeake, who had
supported the Chesapeake party, became a bastion of
Democratic-Republican (purple) support. At the same time, counties in
the southern part of the state, who had supported the Potomac party,
gave consistent support to the Federalists (green). This allowed the
Federalists to remain competitive in elections across the state of
Maryland until 1824. Finally, in the middle and western parts of the
state, voting was mixed and elections were often highly
contested.](/content-img/Maryland-animation-03-17.gif)

![Tracking party completion in Maryland from the Third through
Seventeenth congresses can help identify voting patterns in the state
over time. These graphs revels that the Democratic-Republicans
consistently received a high percentages of the vote in Districts 5, 6
and 7 (U-shaped area at the top of Chesapeake Bay). Conversely, in
Districts 1 and 8 (southern part of the state) the Federalists
consistently received a high percentages of the vote. Early on in
Districts 3 and 4 the Federalist Party received a high percentage of the
vote. However, by the Sixth congressional election, Republicans had
begun to receive substantial support in these areas, and both parties
competed for votes. Finally, elections in District 2, which lay between
the Chesapeake and Potomac regions, were highly contested. In the
<a href="http://earlyamericanelections.org/maps/meae.congressional.congress15.md.county.html">Fifteenth
</a> Congressional election in Prince George's County, Federalist John
C. Herbert was elected over Republican Joshua Barney by only 46
votes.](/content-img/md-party-competition.png)

The voting patterns of these three regions continued into the 1820s.
However, the 1824 presidential election altered these long-entrenched
geographically-based trends. As in many places throughout the country,
candidates in Maryland came to identify less as Federalists or
Republicans, and instead became associated with their choice of
presidential candidate: Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, Henry Clay or
William Crawford. The geographical alliances and local issues that had
dictated Maryland politics for over thirty years had collapsed. National
issues and national personalities finally overrode locally entrenched
concerns.

Throughout the first years of the new nation's existence, geographic
considerations and local issues often played a significant role in
determining party allegiances and political preferences. While most
other states did not demonstrate the extreme localism evident in
Maryland's congressional elections, many others did have geographically
based partisan allegiances. At the same time, Maryland's early political
development also reflects the larger pattern of party evolution that
appeared in other states---a pattern in which politics was tumultuous at
first, with shifting party labels and alliances, but eventually yielded
to more consistent voting patterns and stable party affiliations. Yet by
the 1820s, this pattern, in Maryland and elsewhere, was disrupted by the
the splintering of the Democratic-Republicans and the eventual decline
of the Federalists. In fact, Federalists in Maryland persisted as a
force in state politics much longer than in many other places.
Nonetheless, by the mid-1820s, new party configurations were already on
the horizon.
